Overview of the node's data storage. (#93)
Concordium/concordium-node: docs/data-storage.md

public keys and metadata.

A consequence of this storage format is that if a new identity
provider/anonymity revoker is added the entire map needs to be copied. This was
deemed acceptable since updates to these collections are very very rare.

Additionally, these collections are hashed by serializating the data and then
computing the hash. There is no Merkle tree structure and incremental hashing.
Again, this is acceptable since updates to these collections, at the moment, are
extremely rare, and can only be made by the foundation.

### Birk parameters

This stores information needed by Consensus for baking. It contains three sets
of bakers, one for the current epoch, one for the previous epoch, and one for two
epochs ago. This latter are the bakers that are currently eligible for producing
blocks.

In addition to these three sets of bakers birk parameters store the current
**seed state**. This contains
- metadata about epochs
- leadership election nonce for the current epoch
- a running hash of blocks in the current epochs that go into computing the
  leadership election nonce for the next epoch.

The seed state is stored as a flat structure, serialized and stored.

> Each set of bakers is stored

Reviewer: Incomplete sentence.

### Cryptographic parameters

These are stored by serializing the structure. There are currently no updates to
this value, so only a single copy is ever stored, the one given in genesis.

### Chain parameter and protocol updates

This part of the state stores
- current keys authorized to sign the different update types
- whether a protocol update is currently in effect. This is used to stop
  consensus.

> - current values of chain parameters, this are reward fractions, inflation rate, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- current values of chain parameters, i.e. reward fractions, inflation rate, etc.
```

- pending updates

The **pending updates** consist of an update queue for each update type. All
**update queues** follow the same overall structure and differ only in the exact
payload that they store. This payload is dependent on the exact update type.

Each **update queue** consist of the next sequence number for that update, as
well as a list of pairs of effective time and the payload. The payload is stored
in a way that allows sharing. Enqueueing a new update will not copy the payload,
but it will make a copy of the rest of the update queue.

### Release schedule

The release schedule is a result of scheduled transfers. The main complication
is that the effect of the transaction is not only immediate, but the GTU are

> release over a period of time. This part of the state keeps the information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
released over a period of time. This part of the state keeps the information
```

> needed to efficiently check whether any releases need to be affected at the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
needed to efficiently check whether any releases need to be effected at the
```

releases.

Since this part of the state is uniquely determined from the data stored with
accounts it does not contribute to the state hash computation.

The entire mapping is stored "flat", meaning that any updates to the map cause
the entire map to be written anew. This is alleviated by the fact that the size
of the map is limited by the number of accounts with currently active releases,
and the map is only updated upon an active release.

### Transaction outcomes

For each block we store the outcomes of transactions in that block. The outcome
includes information about the order in the block, whether it succeeded or
failed, the energy and GTU cost of transactions, and any events that resulted
from the transaction. Events are transaction-type specific, and include things
like GTU transfer, and smart contract updates.

Transaction outcomes are currently stored as a "flat" structure, as a serialized
list of transaction outcomes. The outcomes for a block are never updated once
they are created, so this is not too wasteful, the only downside is that it
prevents individual indexing, i.e., looking up the 5th transaction in the block.

> This structure does not contribute to the block state hash.

Reviewer: It probably is worth mentioning that the transaction outcomes are hashed, and this hash is included in the block (along with the block state hash).

- branching nodes always have degree 256
- there is an optimization for the case where there is no branching, we directly
  store the path segment that has no branching

The data structure operations never modify the trie in-place, but rather create
a new trie, retaining as many pointers to the old tree as possible.

This trie implementation is generally not used when consistent, deterministic
hashing is needed. The inner nodes do not store any information, so updating of
the hash of the data would generally require recomputing the hash of the entire
tree.

On disk, the tree is stored in a very classical way. Inner nodes write a list of
pointers (i.e., offsets in the block state file) to the subtrees, and the leafs
store the value.

## LFMB tree (Left-Full Merkle Binary tree)

This is used for storing accounts and smart contract modules. A very similar
structure is used for storing smart contract instances, but it is sufficiently
different that it currently uses a different implementation.

As described above, this is a left-full tree that supports efficient
(asymptotically) lookups, insertions, and updates to the hash of the root and
subtrees.

> The trees are stored in a straighforward way on when serialized. Leafs store the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The trees are stored in a straightforward way when serialized. Leaves store the
```

of auxiliary tables to store temporary data, and indices to support efficient
execution of the consensus and finalization algorithms, and transaction execution.

All of these tables are only kept in-memory, and as a consequence they are lost
if the node restarts.

## Block table

This table maintains the state of all known blocks. For non-finalized and live
blocks it is responsible for storing the block itself, for other blocks it only
maintains metadata. Finalized blocks are stored in the tree store, in the LMDB
database we described above. Dead blocks, i.e., blocks which are either invalid
in some way, or are on a branch behind the last finalized block are marked as
dead, but record of their existence is kept in this table.

## Transaction tables

The transaction table stores, in memory, the non-finalized transactions and two
indices.

The first is an index of non-finalized transactions for an account. This
contains the next nonce (from the perspective of the last finalized block) for
each existing account, and, if there are any, the nonce-indexed transactions
that are not yet finalized for the account. This information is used in two

> ways. The next nonce for the account is used to both deduplicate transactions,
> both on the network, but also to ensure that no transaction is ever put into two
> blocks on the same branch. The index of transactions by nonce is used when the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ways. The next nonce for the account is used both to deduplicate transactions
on the network, and to ensure that no transaction is ever put into two
blocks on the same branch. The index of transactions by nonce is used when the
```

block**.

While the transaction table maintains the pending transactions themselves, the
pending transaction table maintains metadata needed to efficiently update the
transaction table when we get new blocks, as well as to select transactions from
the transaction table at the time the baker is creating a new block.

The **focus block** is updated by consensus so that it is always a live block,
and never behind the **last finalized block**. When it is a baker's turn to bake
a block the focus block is set to the **best block**, which is a protocol
defined block that the baker is supposed to build upon.

# External transaction index database

The external transaction index database is optionally written to by the node
upon each finalization. It stores transaction outcomes for finalized blocks with
an additional index so that incoming as well as outgoing transactions can be
looked up for an account, as well as for smart contract instances.

The postgres database consists of three tables
- the **summaries** table, which has columns
  - **id** --- the auto-generated id of the summary, i.e., the row number. This
    is the primary key.

>   - **block** --- hash of the block the transction is in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **block** --- hash of the block the transaction is in
```
